First, take the roll.
So, Dowling here. Uh
Oh. Actually the
superintendent. I'm here.
We'll, we'll do that. Okay.
Roll call De Angelis. Here. Dowling. Here. Feller.
Here. Holman. Here. Richardson. Here. Re Rish.
Here. Smith. Here. Kabisa Here.
Davidon here.
And if you care to, you can join us
for the Pledge of Allegiance.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America.
And to the republic for which it stands.
One Nation under God, indivisible. Liberty. Liberty.
And Justice. Justice.
Thank you. Uh, welcome everyone
to the January 12th school board meeting.
And, um, as everyone knows, this is a public proceeding.
So unless the board specifically votes
to go into executive session, the public has the right
to hear everything and to look at all exhibits.
Please let us know if you experience any difficulties
with accessibility of any kind.
Members of the district staff are located in the lecture
hall and they can provide assistance.
The school board works from a prepared agenda,
which is posted in advance on the district website,
and printed copies
of this evening's agenda are available near
the entrance of the lecture hall.
Uh, just a reminder that Robert's rules states
that members may speak no more than twice on the same
question at any one meeting, except
by permission of the board chair.
The board asks that the public audience refrain from
clapping, booing side comments,
or other behaviors that could interrupt
the flow of speakers.
Every person is entitled to speak in their opinion,
their opinion, and to feel safe in the process.
So we'll talk about that when we get to, um,
the public comment as well.
So, uh, we will begin with the report of the chair.
So, um, first I wanna say some dates
that are public, and I want people to be aware of them.
The board will be having a Freedom of Access Act, uh,
training this coming Wednesday in the Learning Commons,
and it'll be from five 30 to seven o'clock.
And the public is welcome to attend.
There will be, uh, a public school budget forum,
which will be January 22nd,
and that will be at the middle school
in the multipurpose room.
And that will be from six to 8:00 PM That, um, meeting,
we're really trying to encourage more than our, uh,
our education population to attend.
So we're trying to get this is,
this represents our school budget represents, as I say, over
and over 61% of taxpayers, um, property tax.
So I encourage you to spread the word to neighbors
and friends and have people come to that forum
and be present and give their opinion
because everybody's opinion is welcome.
There'll be a regular meeting, uh,
on February 9th here in the lecture hall.
And then there will be preliminary board discussion, uh,
with the city council on Tuesday the 10th, um,
with the at city hall chambers.
And there will be a, um,
I'm sorry, I missed one.
There will be a budget workshop Monday,
January 26th at 6:00 PM that will be here.
And also on February 23rd at 6:00 PM And that will be here.
Those will be open budget workshops.
Again, those are public meetings,
and we will have opportunity for input.
Um, both of those will follow the forum.
So we're hoping that we get a lot of feedback in the forum,
uh, which is why I encourage you to invite people to come
and that we can
put together ideas.
One of the things we know about the budget this year is
that it's going to be another difficult budget year.
And so we're going to be looking at some creative ways
to really, um,
save money, uh, save money on the budget.
So, um, we're gonna be exploring all kinds of ideas,
and we're gonna be welcoming input from, um,
from a variety of, uh, of constituents.
So I wanted to, um, mention I received an email today,
and it was from the principal of the high school, um,
Sarah Glenn, who wanted to ensure that we had a chance
to hear about the great work
that our track coaches Coach Dave and Coach Matt are doing.
And so, uh, Ms. Glenn had received an email from
a parent from another high school,
and I think it deserves reading.
So I'm going to do that. It says, good evening.
I wanted to take a moment to reach out
after attending tonight's track meet at USM
where your track program competed.
As a parent from another school district,
I had the opportunity
to observe your entire track coaching staff.
And I felt compelled to share
how impressed both my daughter and I were.
The way the coaches spoke
to their athletes was truly inspirational.
They communicated loudly, clearly,
and confidently while remaining positive and kind.
This is exactly the type of leadership kids need.
It was clear that the athletes respect their coaches deeply,
and that respect appeared to be built on encouragement,
consistency, and genuine care for the athletes.
As individuals, good coaches are hard to come by.
And from an outsider's perspective, it truly seems
that your district has built something special
within this track program.
My daughter commented afterwards on how motivating
and supportive the coaches were even expressing her feelings
to one of your coaches.
She felt the same admiration that I did.
Watching from the stands, hearing
that from a student athlete speaks volumes about the
environment your coaching staff has created.
And I hope you know what a positive influence this program
and its coaches are on your students from one parent,
an athlete looking on job.
Very well done. Thank you for taking the time to read this
and for supporting coaches who make such a meaningful impact
on young athletes.
And it is signed by a parent, Nicole Trafton,
who is a parent at Massa Beic High School,
and her daughter Abigail England,
who's a student athlete at Massa Beic.
And, uh, I really wanna congratulate, um, the
high school coaching staff specifically in this instance.
The track coaches, uh, coach Dave Cahill,
and I'm sorry, I don't know Matt's last name.
Sarah Tooth. Tooth Acre. Thank you. Matt Tooth Acre.
So, um, if we can just give them a round of applause
and, um, thank you.
Thank you. And we will now go to the report of,
of the student representative Alex Davison.
All right. Hello everyone.
I hope you're doing well and had a restful break.
Um, first off, all the elementary schools I received just,
uh, elementary wide update.
There wasn't a lot going on since we were on break
for a few weeks, which was really nice.
Um, all schools are reviewing PBIS expectations,
which are being safe, respect, respectful,
responsible, and kind.
Everyone is reviewing and practicing these expectations in
classrooms and common areas.
Students demonstr demonstrating these expectations are
reinforced with the school's reinforcement item.
More schoolwide rewards will be happening soon.
Also, all schools are engaging in various assessments
during, during the month of January.
And these assessments provide data for the MTSS meetings,
which guide instructional practice
at South Portland Middle School.
They're preparing for the sec, uh, second semester, uh,
where students have new related arts classes
and updated intervention classes.
They're gearing up for an awesome family dinner on Thursday
with food from around the world
and looking ahead their staff.
Talent show and field trip fundraiser will be March 26th,
um, for adult education.
The spring semester for South Portland.
Adult Education has started, classes are full
and they have a small wait list
for English language classes for spring.
The following numbers of students are currently enrolled in
adult education programs.
High set seven students, English language acquisition,
135 students, main College
and Career Access eight students.
And then the workforce Bridge to Hospitality, um,
careers with 12 students.
They're happy to report that as of the halfway mark
of the year, nine students have passed the high set.
And this surpasses the total number of students, six
who passed the high set, uh, in all of last year.
Congratulations to those students.
Uh, in addition, students who passed the high set
before December 31st of this year are eligible
for free community college.
High set graduation is slated to take place in August
of this year, uh, at South Portland High School.
The second semester ends this Friday, January 16th.
South Portland High School athletic
department has a new app.
If you have not downloaded it yet already, you should.
Um, because this app has all the team schedules, rosters,
and updates, it can be located at the South Portland School
Department Athletic website.
Main Construction Academy is a paid summer ELO opportunity
for students H 16 plus.
By July of 2026, students receive
a hands-on learning experience, industry connections,
as well as new tools and boots.
Applications are still being processed. See Ms.
Glenn's weekly update or reach out to Anderson or Mr.
Brenner. If interested.
In addition, uh,
the National Honor Society will be hosting a blood drive
for South Portland High School students
and staff on Friday, January 30th, from eight
to one in the auditorium.
We encourage eligible donors
to consider donating and make an appointment.
Again, this is just for staff
and students at South Portland High School.
You can reach out to me or Ms.
Dorian if you have any questions, uh, for nutrition.
Uh, the nutrition department is happy to announce
that South Portland Middle School
and high school kitchens have been third party certified
to serve halal meals by the Islamic Food
and Nutrition Council of America.
In partnership with Halal School, meals Network
School admin have received
detailed information about which offerings are halal
and how to communicate this with staff and students.
You can see their Instagram for more information,
and our website will be updated soon.
Uh, further questions can be directed
to the Hall Halal School Meals Network.
Um, they have other new, um, offerings to boast,
including local potato potatoes
for January's Harvest of the month.
So check out the menus on their website.
In addition, uh, the nutrition department
has rearranged meal service lines at South Portland Middle
School to cut down online times
and added additional signage, including TVs
to make the cafeterias easier to navigate.
They also have a new Instagram account for students, staff,
and community members to stay in.
The know people can see updates, highlights,
and weekly menus at SoPo
Food Service on Instagram. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Uh, any questions for, uh,
board member Davidson?
Or comments? Yeah. Um, member Richardson.
I don't, I don't know if you can answer this,
but I, I I didn't realize that we had a waiting list
for the adult ed program.
I, I don't know if
Anybody, do you have any other
information about that, Alex?
I do not. Um, but I'm sure you can get that information.
Thank you. We do Have, maybe, maybe there's somebody.
Yeah, the director's right here.
You'd have to go ahead if you'd like to come for forward.
Hi, I am Erin Vicki. I'm the Director of Adult Education.
Um, we currently do, um, rolling admissions.
So we have, it's, it's sort
of rolling admissions, sort of not.
We have, um, four different entry
points throughout the school year.
So we start in the fall, we do, uh, a semester in the fall,
one point in the middle of the semester, we enroll students,
and then another, um, semester in the spring
and a midpoint there.
We enroll students. So we currently have just, um, enrolled
as many students as we can for the spring semester,
which runs from January through May.
And we have about 35 students on the wait list
for the ESOL program.
So hopefully by mid, um,
March we might be able to enroll those students.
We have an attendance policy, so if students miss
a certain number of classes, we give them warnings
and let them know if there are people waiting on the wait
list that we will be, um, asking them
to remove themselves from the class if they
haven't attended a certain number of classes.
And then we're able to enroll people from the wait list.
Thank you. You're Welcome.
Um, we're going to now go
to announcements and recognitions.
And so this is school board recognition month.
So I'm gonna turn this over to the superintendent
so he can duly recognize us.
That's a lot of pressure Rose.
Um, so as Rose Marie says, yes, uh,
it is indeed a school board recognition month.
Um, it, uh, includes well-deserved recognition
of the contributions and hard work of school board members.
In celebration of school board recognition Month Board
members will find cards, um,
at your space here tonight, um, made by some
of our artists from the South Portland Middle School, uh,
in the classrooms of Lori Milton and Sandra Weber.
Uh, this is also a great opportunity to, again,
welcome our newest school board members, uh, Tyler Smith,
uh, Daniel Feller, and George Rich,
and also a great time to recognize Eleni Richardson, who has
returned again to the board.
Thank you. So welcome all of you, all
of these folks, all seven, um, special, especially Tyler,
Daniel, and George are really beginning
to more fully understand the scope
of the school board's work, um, right.
Really digging in. Um, and we thank it.
Um, all of our seven board members for their hard work
and dedication to make South Portland
School department schools the very best
that they can be. Congratulations.
Thank you, Anna. I just wanna be sure
that we also recognize our two student members, uh,
Angela Kabisa and Alex Davison because they donate
and dedicate their time to being on the board with us.
And they've, there's a steep learning curve, uh,
Angela has been with us for, this is her third year,
but Alex is brand new.
And, um, so I really appreciate their jumping in
and that we're, we're in the middle
of a superintendent search.
We're going to be relying on them
for their participation as well.
And so I wanna also give recognition to them also.
So, thank you.
Uh, so we are going to have a couple
of other reports tonight, um, in it,
in just a couple of minutes.
Uh, Sarah Glenn, in terms of graduation, uh, 26
and 27, um,
and a South Portland Middle School field update
from Mike Nally.
Um, I'll be talking about strengthening our community
through belonging, and I'll give the, um, enrollment, uh,
report as well, and a, a very brief, uh, budget update.
So, um, these are the, the photos that go along with, um,
superintendent, I mean, the superintendent's report, uh,
the school board appreciation month,
and, uh, now it would be you, uh, Sarah, in terms of,
uh, school, high school graduation, 26
And 27.
Good evening. Sarah Glenn, principal at the high school,
um, in just 144 days.
We're gonna get to celebrate Alex
and Angela graduating high school along with the rest
of the class of 2026.
Um, so to recap this year, um,
we are have a little bit
of an alternative plan for graduation.
Um, so graduation this year is going to be on Friday,
June 5th at 4:00 PM at Martin Field.
Um, and that is because there is going to be a rain date.
Um, we were really fortunate last year to have graduation
outside at our stadium,
but that was, um,
previously we had had a few indoor ceremonies
that were pretty challenging
because they limit seating for a lot of our families.
So there is a rain date of Sunday, June 7th
at 2:00 PM at Martin Field.
If it were to rain on both days at that point,
graduation would be indoors at be gym on Sunday.
Um, project grad will be held on Friday,
June 5th at 6:00 PM That is, regardless
of the graduation date, they're not able to kind
of plan for a rain date.
Um, so very grateful for their partnership
and kind of working around this new plan this year.
To kind of recap the timeline of that,
families were shared this news on August 20th this year,
after an early August survey indicated that over 60%
of students and families preferred this rain date option
to the traditional Sunday only option, um, with hopes
of having a outdoor ceremony at our field
with the availability of unlimited seating.
This brings us though, to next year,
we do run into a little bit of an issue
because graduation has to be moved offsite due
to the athletic complex construction.
Our stadium will not be available for graduation.
So the proposal is that on Tuesday, June 8th,
that we hold graduation in the evening at cross insurance.
Um, arena or center weekend dates are not available.
Those are reserved for schools
that host their graduation there traditionally.
Um, and so that would be an evening one.
Cross insurance center does have unlimited seating.
It is a climate controlled indoor venue.
Um, and it does have a parking garage,
which we have the option.
And what we would choose to do
and explore is to, um, have parking vouchers purchased
and available for our families so that
that's not an additional graduation expense.
Other, other questions?
Sorry, I was trying to get that on my calendar.
Uh, questions. Um, member Richardson,
Um, are, we have not had an update on the athletic
complex construction at all.
This is the first, I mean, aside from the celebration
of the referendum being passed, um,
can we expect, see Mr.
Nally in the Hello?
Um, I, I mean, I don't wanna put you on the spot,
but it would be nice to have some idea of,
it sounds like we have some idea of timing, so
can we expect an update on
Kind of, we can put that on.
Great. Thank you. Thank you.
Yeah.
Any other questions?
Uh, member, uh, Downing. Thank you.
Uh, I'm wondering if we, uh, know what the, uh,
fiscal impact is of the parking vouchers.
So we received, um, a quote for
doing graduation at Cross Insurance when we were exploring
this for 2026.
They have not given me an updated quote for that in kind
of proposing our budget, knowing this was coming,
I've already begun talking with Abigail about an increase in
the cost of graduation from our school budget, knowing
that the move would have a slight impact on that.
Um, so in talking with cross insurance,
they don't have an updated quote as of yet.
So it was A-T-B-T-B-D.
Um, parking at cross insurance for events tends to range
around $10, um, per the event was the original guess.
And so we thought per family,
if every family did receive at least one parking voucher,
we would be looking at around, you know, $2,500
at a maximum, um, for families if that were
to maintain the same cost.
Um, Please,
I have, it's sort of a comment and a, a question.
I'm, I'm wondering if, um, we could look at
what it might cost, uh, to maybe instead of going
that route to have, um, families park at the high school
and have us bus people, shuttle people, uh, since we,
we have a fleet of buses, um, the bus drivers have
to be paid, obviously, but I wonder if that might be, um,
maybe less than the 2,500.
Yeah, I know I can work with Mike Nally on, on doing
that and getting a comparison.
Thank you. And just as a follow up to that, um, Ms.
Glynn, do you have a cost of
what the graduation is at Cross Arena?
You know what the, I know you only got it for 2026,
and I know it would be slightly up from that,
but just so we have some ballpark of what that cost is.
Yep. At the time they had kind of given an estimate
of somewhere between eight to $10,000, um,
given your AV package.
Okay. Uh, a board member, Fowler. And
For our esteemed student representatives,
where would you prefer to graduate?
Well, well, we're we're, we're,
we're not gonna ask questions this way.
So if you have a question for Ms. Glynn, do you have
A question? Ms. Glenn, where do you think
students
would prefer to graduate?
Um, I, we had conducted a survey originally.
I think the preference is probably at the high school,
is absolutely the preference that they've preferred.
The number one piece of feedback though was a place
that had enough seating so that all of their friends
and family could come, was the driving force, um, for most
of our students and family.
I will say I have had a lot of conversations, um,
and I have spoken specifically
with these two about graduation.
They were pretty instrumental in getting the rain date
option going as well.
Thank you. Question from, um, member Davison.
Can I make a comment? Yes.
Um, yes, I agree with Ms. Glenn.
That was definitely the most important factor was to be able
to have as many people as we can.
Um, I know that I have a lot of family members
that would like to go and I think Angela is the same.
So yeah, that's definitely the most important factor for us.
Thank you. Other questions, comments about graduation?
Okay. Thank you. Thank you, Ms. Glenn. Thank you.
So we'll move, um, on
to the South Portland Middle School field update.
Mike Nally, director of Operations and Safety.
Good evening everybody.
And before I get to the field, I will circle back with you.
Uh, we had a, uh, preliminary call, our first kind
of first official call about the stadium updates, um,
over winter break.
I'm definitely not prepared to speak to it tonight,
but happy to work through the superintendent to get
that on a, a a future agenda.
Make a presentation. Thank you. Of course. Um, excuse me.
So for the middle school field there, uh,
you're gonna hear a lot of the same words I said
last month when I was up here.
They we're kind of in a, a a period of time
where we can't take a lot of action,
but what we, we are convicted on our plan of this spring.
We are going to, we're gonna a irrigate, excuse me.
We're going to, uh, we're gonna use aeration.
We're gonna oversea, we're gonna fertilize, and we're gonna,
and we're gonna irrigate it.
And that is the path that we are going to be on to get
that field playable by fall of 26.
That goal has not changed.
Um, kind of update since we last spoke.
We've submitted the waiver to the city for the fertilizer.
Um, we are waiting to hear back on that.
I suspect that's a couple weeks turnaround.
I think by the time this group gathers again,
I can tell you yay or nay on that.
We have a good partnership
and we've, we have, um, got that waiver in the past.
I'm optimistic around that.
We were on site with Shaw brothers, um,
that is the subcontractor that did the work,
took additional core samples.
Um, last Thursday I was there myself,
there was some question about the,
the composition of the field.
The spec calls for, there's a gravel base
and then there's six inches of topsoil or loam.
Um, and there was questions
about whether that was deep enough.
We took 10 core samples spread throughout the field.
Um, each one was six inches
or greater, so it meets the spec.
Um, it was heavily compacted.
That could be due to frost, due
to a couple environmental factors.
I think aeration will help loosen that up.
So when we fertilize and we oversee it in the spring,
there's, there's an opportunity for,
there's a better opportunity for success there.
Um, WBRC was there with me.
Shaw was there, um, Harvey Construction was there.
Titas is our third party consultant.
All parties are are saying, this is the path forward.
This is what's gonna get that field playable.
So that's the, that's the path we remain on.
Um, probably
what this group's most interested in
is who's paying for this.
Um, and we haven't fully landed that plane today.
I had a call with all those folks
that I just mentioned at three o'clock today.
Um, I am, I am unbudging on the fact it's not going
to be South Portland School Department that pays for it.
And I think we are going to, um, you know,
of those three or four different parties,
I'm not sure who's gonna pick up that tab
for the remediation work.
Remediation work. Um, but I'm gonna hold that line
and tell, tell somebody tells me
that we are in breach of contract.
And obviously I'll communicate that up.
Um, we have a meeting tomorrow with the city, um,
four or five folks from the city to talk about,
uh, maintaining the field.
That's gonna be a huge part
of getting it playable, getting it playable quickly.
Um, and that was a problem in the past,
and I'm hoping that we can resolve peacefully tomorrow.
Um, my, my, so I'll leave it at that.
Um, but we're gonna, we're gonna get all
that stuff taken care of so when the snow clears,
we can get right after it in the spring.
Um, I have cleared up any questions
with the middle school in terms of what the field
use can be until then.
Uh, the, the guidance is that field is usable for movement
and gym class and extracurricular activities until the point
where we oversee and we put fertilizer on it,
then I'm gonna ask everybody to stay off it,
to give the grass a chance to catch.
Um, but it can be used, uh, in the short term.
Thank you. Are there questions that people have?
Uh, um, board member Smith?
Um, so how's it going? I'm Tyler.
I was actually on the land care Management committee when
you guys submitted the waiver last year,
and I was on the waiver committee.
Okay. Um, and one of the, so I'm an arborist by trade.
I don't do grass, but I, I do plants.
Um, and one of the concerns that we had,
a couple concerns we had, um, with, with the waiver is
one, the soil samples showed that the,
you might have six inches alone,
but the quality of the soil was poor.
Right. And the construct,
my guess is the compaction was related
to construction vehicles on the surface
after the loan was put down, which is, I think,
the main cause of the problem.
One thing that I would, uh,
I'm concerned about still is the putting
down fertilizer in the spring.
Um, one of the things that
that does is it supports herbaceous growth.
So all the weeds that we have to deal with, knowing
that we're not gonna wanna put herbicide down later,
and that a fall fertilizer,
a late summer fertilizer is the ideal
time to put that down on grass.
So I'm not sure what the consultants, uh, consultants
or other groups if that has been discussed at all.
But one thing I'd want to consider, I,
it's obviously we want to get fertilizer done as fast
as possible, but I don't want to do it at the expense
of the quality of the field.
So, um, I don't know if you guys have discussed that at all.
Um, sure. Yeah. I just wanna bring that up. So
The, the recommendation is to put down herbicide too.
I think that's, and I would defer to you, sir, that
that would be a little bit more of a reach
to get a waiver for herbicide.
So the consensus is fertilizer without herbicide is still,
is, is still, um, going to be successful, albeit slower.
Um, if we could get an herbicide waiver,
which I have not applied for yet,
'cause I thought that was, was a no-go, um, you know,
that would accelerate that process.
Yeah. But I, I, I would a hundred percent defer to your,
your expertise on that.
And I think, I think, are you a new member
of the Buildings and Grounds committee?
I'm, I'm not actually,
but I'd be happy to talk to you more about it.
Okay. Okay, great. Yeah. Um, can I, can I speak again to it?
Um, the, so we have approved herbicide waivers
for the city before for, uh, their athletic fields
and specifically for high performance fields
because of the danger of, of having weeds
and the effect that it has on the ground.
So I, I would encourage you to at least think about that.
It's obviously not ideal to put herb herbicide down,
but the, the,
the weeds are just winning the race on the field right now.
Um, and so I'd be happy to talk more offline, but yeah,
I would, I would a hundred percent take you up on that.
Great. Um, yeah, let's, let's connect on that. Mm-hmm.
Uh, thank you. Other questions? Um, member Richardson,
Um, have, has there been a discussion about
redoing the field entirely?
And, and, and what, um, you know,
some of this, I mean, I'm not an expert,
but are we just kind of, is this a short term solution
that's just gonna become a problem
such that, I don't know if you've, have we done a compare
and contrast of what, of whatever the plan
that we're pursuing versus just a complete dig up the field
and resaw every resaw the field and,
and what that looks like, assuming
that we're not having to pay for this?
Yes, we looked at that. Um,
and I'm not sure the party that would pay for it.
Um, I think Shaw's the subcontractor. Yep.
Harvey's the contractor. Yep.
Um, I, I would defer to a lawyer on this,
but I, I don't, I don't see a path
that we get them to pay for it.
And the price tag for that was astronomical.
It was, uh, like three quarters of a million dollars
to a million dollars to start over.
Um, so my, my judgment on that was
this is the path to get that field play.
The, the path I laid out here gets
that field playable quickest at the lowest cost.
Um, and I don't see it as, uh,
short term solution
that's gonna cause problems down the road.
If this solution works, which I believe it will, then
that's just then, then the,
the problem has been solved going forward, starting over.
You're, you're, you're definitely losing a season
crazy price tag.
And, um, I just, I, I don't think
that's my recommendation is that's not the path.
Right. But, But to answer your question,
we definitely looked at it,
But it seems as if we were delivered.
Like, and I mean, I am a lawyer,
but I haven't looked at the contract
and I'm not providing you legal advice in any way.
But, um, you know, I, part of what, part of
what a con the contractor was paid for was to,
to produce a field based on whatever qualifications
that were identified in that agreement
or whatever we agreed to.
Mm-hmm. And, and did they deliver that to,
did they make good on that or?
'cause 'cause from what I've heard, it's filled with rocks.
So was that, you know,
an an, yeah. Yeah.
So, so we are withholding money still until, okay.
Until, until the, until that field is playable.
We, we have funds in reserve that we, we have not paid
yet. Okay. And that's been, that's
Like an invoice is not being paid? Correct.
Okay. And there's, you know,
there's contention around that.
Yeah. Uh, to the rock question.
I, I, I definitely have heard that. Yeah.
Um, you know, we were, we found rocks last Thursday
that were, um, three quarters
of an inch in diameter.
You know, that was the largest one we saw.
And we were going down three
or four inches into the loam before we found those.
So that it seems like that was coming up from the,
from the gravel base.
So I think, I think that rock issue is overstated. Okay.
And, um,
and that's part of the thing that we're meeting
with the city about tomorrow, because that's, that's
where some of the, the issues
were with the city maintaining it.
They didn't wanna put their equipment on
the field with the rocks.
And, and certainly I care less about that,
more about kids on the field with rocks.
Somebody's gonna have to maintain it though.
Yeah, no, absolutely. Absolutely.
No, I think the city,
I think we're gonna get there with the city.
Mm-hmm. Um, but I, I think that's being overstated based on,
based on my onsite observation. Okay.
I got it. Claire, uh, member, uh, Holman.
So, um, thank you so much, Mike,
and I'm very glad you're here to talk to us.
Um, and I'm sorry that you got this,
this is something was like, too bad.
This has happened, honestly.
And, um, it's been a long-term problem.
And, um, one of the things I'd like to suggest is that if,
to the extent that it continues,
that we have a little more transparency.
So transparency would include having somebody else there.
We know there's been a few meetings,
but it seems like in those meetings,
there's nobody who's kind
of not on the inner core who's there.
And it's good to have somebody who's not on the inner core
because they're gonna have a fresh perspective
and be less likely to feel beholden.
And, um, I will say
that I think three quarter inch rocks is, are big.
And I would say that we got a really cheap chatty field.
That wasn't what we expected at all.
And that was, it's substandard,
and we shouldn't, we shouldn't
say, oh, well it's six inches.
It meets spec. It's like, it's not good enough.
And the idea there's nothing new coming down.
Like, they're just gonna try and fluff this what they says.
We'll fluff it up for you.
No, well, not, we'll fluff it up for you.
We need a lot better than we'll fluff it up for you.
We need actually more soil. We need this fixed up.
I mean, I, I like the new idea,
but you know, we, we need, we deserve better than this.
It's what we paid for better than this.
And, you know, I, I mean, I've said
before, we should be suing.
We shouldn't be like, and it shouldn't be like, well,
we asked them and they didn't feel like it.
And you know, it's not fair to put you in that position.
You need someone who's, who's gonna be able to say that.
And, you know, I don't, I don't see, you know, where,
where it says in, you know, your job description shouldn't
be the one who has to fight that fight.
And, you know, who's gonna help you fight that fight?
'cause we have to fight harder. I really
feel very strongly about this.
This is wrong. We were wronged
and we can't afford to, to be put in a situation
where we're getting a little fix up.
We, we got the fluff up and fluffed it up for us. Okay?
Doesn't that look nice? The grass grew on top
of the fluffy stuff, then you start using it.
And if that's what, what's gonna happen, we all know
what happens when you fluff something up.
You know, you have to fluff it up again.
I don't, let's no fluff.
Let's get the stuff we need, you know,
so who's gonna help you with that?
Like, you know, like, who's gonna help you?
You know, you need help. It's
not right to put you in that position.
And you know, I mean, it's just not right.
You know, you, I mean, you need someone who has more of a,
like who I, so do we, do we, do the board members show up?
I mean, who, who is it? Do we bring our lawyer in?
No, I mean, I'm just asking. Yeah.
Okay. Okay. Okay. So I, I'm gonna stop
for a minute if I can.
I'm gonna defer to the superintendent.
Uh, this is, this is his coverage.
Who comes to the meetings, who attends, who,
who fights this out, is up to the superintendent.
So, um, I'll give you an opportunity superintendent
and whistle to respond.
Yeah. Well, I, I, I love Claire's,
um, energy about it.
And, uh, and I would agree, you know, maybe,
maybe there should be, um, someone else added who can, uh,
represent the taxpayers.
Um, and, uh, so why don't we look into that? You, Mike,
You would like to next meeting tomorrow.
So, sorry, I'm outta turn to say that, but
That's Alright. Yeah,
I'm, I'm just, I'm just gonna encourage
that it not be a board member, uh, that,
that this is not our purview.
This is the superintendent.
If the superintendent determines
that somebody else should be there, that's,
that's up to him.
And, uh, he can resolve that with Mike. Okay. Okay.
Thank you. Other, other questions
or comments, uh, pertaining
to this issue?
Um, member Smith? Yeah, I'll
Keep it brief so we don't have to continue,
but I think, um, I just wanna say that I, I think
as a district with this field, we were kind of screwed
with the way that it went down.
I think the solution that you're providing us
is kind of the best solution.
So I just wanna give you some support there that I think
with, especially with the concerns with the rocks, not
to get too detailed, but when there's no root layer on, uh,
on the top soil, right?
If anyone's gardened in New England
before, you know that we have a really rocky soil.
And so if there's any rocks that live underneath
that top soil, it's gonna rise to the top
during the freeze straw of winter and spring.
So I think the reason that we're seeing rocks
after, you know, core samples that show us
that we have top soil is that there's no, there's not enough
of a root layer from the grass that needs to grow.
And so I think that is a problem that can be solved.
And so I just wanna give some support that like,
this is a solvable problem.
I think you're absolutely right that
it's not the best solution,
but I think it's not a short term solution either,
that this is something that we can work with. And
Thank you. Member Smith. Smith.
Can I just ask him a question about that?
You, you cannot ask him a question. No.
You can ask George a question. George,
Would you please ask Tyler for me?
Um, uh, um, I'd like to know from Tyler if, um, he thinks
that more soil would be a good
Solution. That's not
an appropriate question,
so I'm not gonna entertain that.
Are there other comments
or questions that people have with regard to this topic?
Seeing none. Thank you, Mike.
Alright, thank you.
Thanks, Mike. Uh, so we're gonna move on to
strengthening our community through belonging, uh, just
around this, uh, same time.
Um, uh, last month at our, around the time
of our last board meeting, I released a message
to our parents and, and guardians
and also to our staff entitled,
strengthening Our Community Through Belonging.
And I thought it would be a good time to share this
more broadly, so please bear with me
and I'm gonna give you a little bit of an overview of that.
The purpose of the communication was
to reinforce the message that
our schools are welcoming places for all students,
regardless of immigration status.
And further, that every child has the right
to access high quality education in a safe and secure space.
It seemed like a good time to revisit this message for sure.
Uh, we continue now
to support our entire commun school community
by one, reinforcing our commitment to safety
and respect, acts of discrimination, bullying, harassment,
or intimidation will not be tolerated.
Point two, expanding communication
and support for our families in partnership
with the University of Main Refugee and Human Rights Clinic.
We have been, uh, for a period of time now planning training
for staff and for students.
Um, and we are, we will be prepared to roll out details on
that training very soon.
I think, uh, some training in January
and some training in February.
Um, uh, 0.3,
strengthening classroom practices that foster belonging.
Our equity commitments remain at the core
of the work, and they are.
And we believe in the unlimited capacity of all students,
every student, and hold all students in, um,
to high expectations.
We use data to drive equity and close opportunity gaps.
We use our resources, especially time with urgency
and intentionality in pursuit of excellence.
For all I like to say, every student,
we embrace our responsibility
and capacity to make a a difference for every student.
And lastly, we commit to interrupting injustice
and take action for equality,
encouraging our community to care for one another.
One of the greatest assets here in South Portland School
community is the compassion
of our students, staff and family.
I see it all the time. Let's encourage each other
to model empathy, listen generously
and extend kindness, especially to those
who may be feeling vulnerable.
The last report that I have is on enrollment.
You see the number there?
It's 2,736 as of the 8th of January.
Um, and essentially this enrollment, uh,
continues to remain stable.
Lastly on my list is, uh, budget update.
So before you get to that, um, superintendent,
I just wanna see if there's any questions
that board members have on the strengthening our community
or the enrollment report.
Um, member Richardson.
Um, so I
think we need to do better as a district here.
Um, I would like, um, I,
I received reports that multiple children did not go
to school today in fear.
So, um, I, I would like us to, um,
consider escalating the timeline for training for our staff
for how to respond to enforcement showing up.
Um, at our schools.
I would like,
and I would like us to consider I
putting together a more formal public statement on our
guidance so that we're not asking questions about
who family, like, like who is the point person for families
to, to kind of triage an issue in real time?
Is that teachers, are we expecting that of our teachers?
Um, if we are, then we need to say that publicly.
Um, I,
yeah, it's not a question,
and maybe I'm making this a statement,
but this was, this is, we need to do, we need to do more.
And I actually don't think it's that difficult to do more,
um, to be more transparent
because we have so many people in this community that want
to help, that are helping our families.
And if we can just make that information more accessible,
I think that's, that's,
that's at least the minimum we can do
because we, again, have children not going
to school because they are scared to go to school.
So we need to tell them that they are safe
and that they are protected,
and we need to explain to them how that is the case
There. Uh, other
comments or questions?
And any comments or questions about the
superintendent's enrollment report?
Oh, yeah. I just wanna say I support your idea of, uh,
I support the idea suggested by, um, Eleni Richardson
that we could have some kind of statement.
I think that's wise and, uh, um, uh, to let students know
what, let students and families know what we can do
to the small extent that we can.
And Member Davidson,
I just wanted to say that I support you too.
I think that's something that we can do. Thank you.
And Member Ri Rich,
Is there any, uh, committee
or subcommittee that would work on this?
Mm-hmm. You know, what would be the next action?
Um, superintendent Aunt Whistle.
So there is a, there is a group
that has been working on this.
There has been a protocol,
a protocol has been shared with staff.
Okay. Um, and, um, essentially we've simplified it.
It was a, it was a bit of an extensive, uh,
more extensive protocol previously,
and it was more simplified in terms of taking the burden off
of, um, any staff really, except for office staff
who would just simply notify their principal.
Uh, the principals then know what to do.
They would notify the superintendent
and assistant superintendent.
And, um, in the event that there was a presence of ice,
it would be the two of us that would be dealing that, uh,
looking at the warrant and taking the next steps.
So we've, we've, it's, and that has been shared publicly.
Um, it's,
it was intentionally simplified.
Uh, we had a chance to speak to some experts, um, from the,
uh, university, uh, law clinic, um,
and hu uh, for human rights
and refugee, say it again? Refugee
And human rights. Ref,
refugee and human rights.
Um, and, uh, they, they, in our conversation, uh,
Rebecca and I, and,
and Joe had that conversation, it was around training.
Um, and so the, the training is lined up.
We do have dates, um,
and more will be coming out about that,
but they also felt that the, that that strategy
of keeping it simple, simple, yeah.
Was really not sort of taking the burden
and the worry a away from people who felt
that they would need to do something more than that
Question. Um, remember Richard?
Sorry, just a follow up question. I, I mean, we have
seven schools, so I, I mean, I agree
that a simple policy makes a lot of sense for people to kind
of just know what to do in a given, in an, like,
in a situation that's really intense like this.
But realistically, does it make sense that only you
and our assistant superintendent are reviewing warrants?
Given we have seven, we
We would be the initial reviewer of warrants.
We would then get consultation with our, our, our attorney.
Right. But can I just, I just want you to, I don't,
we don't have to get into this, but I just want you
to consider a real, I mean, you, you
and Joe are across town,
so if we have something going on at small
or brown, you know, how quickly can you get there?
So such that I would think we need at least
somebody at each school that is trained and, and, and,
and comfortable with reviewing, uh, a warrant,
which there is so much training out there.
I mean, I, it, it, it, it seems, it just, I just want you
to consider that realistic, considered.
Thank you.
Um, member Holman. Um, I'd like to, I'd like to, um,
second that and say that, um, uh,
because we may be looking at a situation
that could be very chaotic, right?
That there could be, this could be an more kind
of an assault on a school, you know,
and the poor people who are in the front,
what do they know what to say?
What is their language gonna be?
Uh, you know, uh, do they know not to open the door?
You know, that the, and
that the warrant has to be signed by a judge.
I mean, do they know those things? You
know, it's, it could be chaotic.
Thank you. Other comments, questions, concerns?
Okay, I seeing none, um, can go on with
That. So, um, the
last, uh, part of my report, uh, has to do
with the, uh, budget process update.
Um, I think there's something that's interesting
that's happened here.
There was previously a, um, state
of the school's address made by the superintendent.
Um, we've switched that up.
Um, and indeed it's going to be a public school budget forum
that's at 6:00 PM Thursday, January 22nd,
in the multipurpose room at the middle school.
Um, and the, the purpose there is, um, uh,
um, that the, uh, public is invited, uh, to this gathering,
uh, which we'll focus on, uh, soliciting input
and answering questions of attendees.
Uh, we're excited to engage in more conversation, uh, give,
uh, giving us the opportunity to do more listening.
Again, that will be on Thursday, January 22nd,
middle school multipurpose room.
Um, uh, the public is invited, um, voters are invited.
Um, uh, uh, and, um,
and the middle school,
that multipurpose room I just learned is just
above the central office.
So j, just to reinforce what the superintendent just said,
the January 22nd is a public open meeting for
anybody in South Portland.
So, um, you know, you don't have to be a, a,
a homeowner or a parent or a taxpayer
or, I mean, everybody is welcome
because everybody is impacted by the decisions
that this budget makes.
Uh, even renters are actually taxpayers, so,
um, they pay taxes through their increase in their rent.
That, that is typically annual.
So, uh, again, I encourage you to, uh,
support people and help people.
If people need rides
or, um, have access about, um, being able
to get there or accessibility, please let us know
through the superintendent's office
and we will make sure that we get people there.
Um,
Uh, lastly is, uh,
Oh, and I'm sorry, I just wanted to see,
did anybody have any specific budget questions
that they wanted to ask?
Uh, superintendent, I mean, member Richardson.
Yes. Thank you. Um, I just on the enrollment,
is it possible going forward for you to show like
an arrow up or arrow down so we know if enrollment is up
or down from the previous?
I can do that.
It would, it's, it's really, it's really leveled out.
It's changing. Okay. Okay.
You know, by, or net by three, three
or four one way or the other, but,
So maybe plus three minus three or something.
It, it just, I think
that's helpful transparency, given the budget.
You know, enrollment is down over the years,
so if we can just see that each month, that's helpful
to know or keep
Track of. Maybe, maybe we'll
just do a, a graphic
and we'll Sure. We'll look at where that,
That'd be great. Thank you.
And you can continue. Superintendent.
Um, I just wanted to review the resignations, um,
and retirements, uh, Jessica Kaplan, uh, resignation, uh,
English teacher at the high school, uh, resignation,
Shelby Flynn, science teacher also at the high
school retirements.
Um, at the end of this school year, Henry call, uh,
world Languages, uh, at the high school.
Uh, her, uh, Kurt Herbert, uh, school counselor at Kaler,
Jane McNeely, Nally Neely, I, I think it says, um,
fifth grade humanities teacher, uh, at the middle school.
Um, John Heffernan, sixth grade math
and science teacher at the middle school.
Lynn Hassen, seventh grade, uh, math teacher,
um, at the middle school.
And any comments
or questions about, uh,
resignations from retirees? Uh, member Fowler,
I have a question for, uh, superintendent Ed Wezel.
Um, well first a comment, uh, thanks to all the folks
who are retiring for their service.
Um, my second question, and I'm asking this
because a couple weeks ago we had seen that our staff
to student ratio is quite low
and has been dropping over time.
And so with each retirement
and resignation, are we automatically back
filling these positions
Or How, how Does that work? We
are not, we are not
automatically
refilling those positions.
How do those decisions get made on whether to
Backfill position? It's gonna be through
this budget process
that we're engaged in. Got
It. Very good. Thank you.
Thank you. We are up to public comment,
and this is the first of two public comments.
So, uh, the portion of the agenda,
we have changed this a bit.
So it's an opportunity for the board to listen to opinions
of the public that relate to school
and educational matters on or off the agenda.
So you can speak now on or off the agenda.
The board is here to listen.
Anyone wishing to speak will be asked to proceed
to the microphone, give your name and just the town
or city where you reside.
You'll be given three minutes to speak.
And as a reminder, uh, board meetings are broadcast,
live recorded, and posted on the city's website.
So please consider that when you make your comments.
Thank you.
Good evening. My name is Melinda Hull.
I live, uh, on Kayla Road in South Portland.
I have a daughter at Brown and a niece at Small.
Given the increased in targeted ice activity in our
communities, several of us in the district
and city are concerned that the most vulnerable among US
staff, students, and their families
are getting the support that they need.
I'm glad to hear of recent meetings
with immigrant support groups and plans for training.
However, I have a bunch of questions on
what other things the school community is
doing or plans to do.
Are student and staff absences being tracked to understand
how the ICE raids are impacting school operations
and student experiences?
Can these numbers and impacts be communicated to the public,
to the media, and
to our elected leaders in a coordinated way?
Ideally in conjunction
with other school systems in employers across the state,
have teachers and social workers been advised
to work together to get learning materials
and lessons to the kids who are unable to attend school
for fear of putting their lives
or their family members' lives in danger?
What are we doing to ensure that they are not falling
behind academically?
Also, what communication is going out
to our immigrant families regarding
what they can expect when they do send their kids to school?
Are all social workers working with each family
to share resources on protocol policy and their rights
and get food to them even if needed?
I heard from a Portland public school social worker
and friend that her school is pairing up immigrant
and vulnerable families with a buddy family if they desire.
I'm not sure what exactly what that buddy family entails,
but the idea seems like a worthwhile endeavor if we want
to promote a culture of belonging.
There's so much more to say and do,
but I'll conclude with this.
Given the events coming up next week, how are we going
to ensure the engagement
and feedback around the budget
that we very much need from the most vulnerable among us?
How will those interests and challenges and their promise
and potential be included in this important process?
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Set up. Okay.
Hi, I'm Connie. I live and work in South Portland.
Um, I'm also president of our ed
Tech. Connie, can you speak
into the microphone? Sorry.
Yeah, because we can't hear you. Thank
You. Can you hear me now? Yes.
Okay. Hi, I'm Connie DeSanto.
I am, uh, live and work in South Portland,
and I am also president of our ed tech clerk
and Office Manager Union.
Uh, together with the South Portland Teachers Association,
south Portland Educational Service Professionals Association
and the South Portland Service Employees Association,
we condemn the recent rise in aggressive
and unlawful immigration enforcement actions
that have created fear and instability in our country.
Our schools ensure a crucial human right
for our city's children, the right to an education.
No child's education should be interrupted by fears
of being targeted, questioned, detained,
or separated from their family.
A number of children miss school today due
to their family's very reasonable, reasonably founded fears.
This is unacceptable, but we also have staff who
likewise, do not feel safe coming to work.
These fears are harmful, destabilizing,
and fundamentally incompatible with the values
of public education and democratic society.
Thank you Board member Richardson
for requesting an accelerated timeline
for providing training for staff
and for your recommendation
that the board share a prompt public statement as well.
We encourage the South Portland, excuse me, school board
to stand unequivocally against any individual
or agency that threatens the safety, dignity,
or wellbeing of our students, families or staff.
We will continue to show up for our students every day.
We ask our elected school leaders to do the same by standing
publicly and firmly for safety, justice
and the right to stand to learn without fear.
Thank you. Alright,
I could probably do this in a minute.
11. Whenever you're ready.
Good evening. Uh, my name is Sarah Gay.
I'm a South Portland resident, parent and employee
and president of the South Portland Teachers Association.
Um, on behalf of the SPTA
and our other two staff bargaining units, I also wish
to encourage you to provide some additional opportunities
for our staff and community members to engage meaningfully,
not simply to offer public comment or complete surveys,
but to participate actively in constructive dialogue
and shared learning about the challenges
and opportunities facing our district.
We are very eager to partner with you
to bring these conversations into the community
and to ensure that staff voices are fairly represented
and genuinely heard.
Um, as we move towards the 20 26, 20 27 budget, I, I hate,
I'm gonna be a broken record about this one,
but I want to reiterate that our staff members are not going
to be offering specific,
specific budget recommendations or proposals.
We are however, very eager
to provide informed feedback on any plans, ideas,
and options that you put forward.
Uh, most public school educators do not surprisingly have
specialized expertise in the areas of financial, legal
and logistical planning that inform a school budget.
Um, what we do bring is deep expertise in the lived
realities of our work
and the day-to-day impact of the decisions
that will be made through this process.
Uh, we therefore urge our school board
to share your thinking, share your proposals with us so
that we can contribute that professional insight in a
meaningful and constructive and appropriate way.
Um, that said, as well, we are very eager to hear from you.
Um, if you have questions for us, we have a lot to share.
And we're very, very eager to include you
and help provide anything
that will better inform your decisions in your thinking,
or to just build your context
of this amazing community you serve.
Thank you.
Thank you, Sarah.
Hi, my name's Rachel Healy.
I'm a teacher at the middle school, also the parent
of a middle school student and a student at
Brown Elementary School.
Uh, thank you for having this conversation about safety
for all people in our district.
I echo everyone who said, um, I think we need to do more
and we need to do it faster.
Um, make things clear to all of the families
who are depending on us.
Um, but I specifically wanted to urge you as you think about
how we can make, uh, everybody feel safe at school,
that you also consider in that conversation
how we can make people feel safe getting to school.
I heard anecdotally that a lot
of people were just afraid about the process of getting
to school, whether it was waiting at the bus stop
or driving their students.
So whether that happens in committee, um, make sure that
that's a part of the conversation as well. Thank you.
Thank you. Any other
comments from the public?
Seeing none, the first public audience, uh, is closed.
So we are now up to the report of committees
and, um, so we will start with the report
of the finance committee from, um, Ms. Holman.
Thank you. Um, all right, so, uh,
oh, there's, I think there's a slide for that.
Thank you. Um, so, um, so we're at 50%
of the financial, I'm just gonna go over this a little bit
and I'll have some comments following it.
Um, 50% of the fiscal year has elapsed with 92%
of funds expended and encumbered,
which does not include future expenditures such
as remaining non-personal expenses and debt service.
And I just wanna say our financial director, um,
Abigail Ketin, has done a great job
with this encumbering process of letting us know
how much we spent, not just what money, like,
how much we've spent, and how much we've encumbered.
In other words, it's, those paychecks haven't been set out
yet, but that money spent,
because if we have to have the money
for those paychecks, for example.
Alright. And then, um, so, uh, um, so,
so a couple of, a couple of the other updates, uh,
updated range from 300 530 4K surplus
to 1.4 million deficit
with some spending surpassing the pri the prior month,
50% scenario offset by updated fi fund balance production.
But basically, so if you were
to see the last month's projection,
it looks like a little bit less projected in the red,
but we are very much still headed.
If we, there's,
there's pretty much the way we're headed now.
We are going to be in the red.
We have to understand that we're not in a scenario
where we're likely not gonna be in the red.
Uh, we are likely to be in the red,
and it's no fun to have to say that, but that's the reality.
And no amount of great accounting's gonna change the fact of
what the, what the actual dollars are.
Um, so, uh, uh, the continue refinement and so forth.
You know, there, there, you never know what kind
of great things may happen to us that could cause a shift,
but there's nothing really likely.
Um, and, uh, um, we'll, we'll be getting an update on
how nutrition, the, the cost of nutrition for us.
And, uh, another thing that's really cool,
the thing about the software thing, actually, that has to do
with the fact that, um, our budget goes
through the city's budget, of course,
and they have a software system called uni.
And we must use that
because that we have to dovetail correctly with them,
but they don't use the part where they encumber salaries.
But it's really very, very, very cumbersome
to encumber salaries, if you're unable, aren't able
to use that software function.
And fortunately, Abigail's gonna be getting some training
thanks to careful and skillful negotiation
on her part with the city.
They've agreed to let her have training on that
and be able to use that, which will, you know, it's better
for everybody because why have someone doing a very
cumbersome task that can be done just as well
and allow time for other things.
So that's good news for us. That's pretty much what I have.
Thank you. And, uh, I apologize.
I wanna go back to the public comment because I missed this,
but there were some questions from, uh, at least one
of the speakers, and I wanted to go back, um,
because we do try to answer questions at the end
of public comment, so my apologies for that.
Um, superintendent Ed whistle, the questions, um,
included are, the first question was, are we tracking
student and staff absences?
We absolutely are. Yes.
I mean, we would, we would do that anyway.
Absenteeism of students is, um, is a big concern.
So that's tracked very closely.
So we would, we would be able to, we
intentionally go in and look at any particular dates
or periods of time, and we could, uh, look at what the, uh,
the, the statistics would tell us.
So the second question I have,
and pe people can correct me
because I was trying to do this quickly,
but, uh, can these absences be communicated in, um,
in a concerted way?
You know, can, can the these be communicated?
I think that what the speaker was addressing was,
can these be communicated to the press, to the public?
Um, and so again, um, yeah.
Yes, there's, there's, um, there's,
those can be made public, those not who,
but the, the statistics can be made public, certainly,
Right?
The next question had to do with have teachers
and social workers been advised, uh, about how to prepare,
get work to students
and prepare students who are not present so
that they don't get behind?
I think probably any of our teachers here could answer
that they are engaged in that.
Um, I don't know that it's specific in terms of, uh,
the immigration enforcement that, um,
that there would be something, uh,
done that would be different.
I, I think that teachers are, are monitoring students
who are missing work and, and,
and are, uh, working in ways to try to,
uh, remediate that.
The next question had to do with, uh, the model
that's being appears
to be being used in Portland about pairing up
and having buddy families.
Have we looked at this or are we looking at this?
Um, and is this something that South Portland would consider
or is considering?
Uh, I, I think, uh,
that certainly sounded interesting to me.
So I, I think that we could certainly explore something like
that and see what is,
I'm guessing this is happening in Portland, uh,
and we have a pretty good relationship with Portland,
so I'm, I'm sure we could, uh, see what they're doing.
And the last question I had was, uh,
and this is sort of an ongoing thing,
and I know our, uh, our, uh, director of diversity, equity
and inclusion is also here and belonging.
So, um, how are we going to
ensure input from our most vulnerable populations
during this budget season?
So, I know we're having the forum, um,
but I think that this question came from
people feeling like they're not wanting
to come out publicly.
So are we doing anything else to, um,
get input from these populations during budget time?
I think that would need to be a strategy of the board to,
if it's specifically to get input on the budget,
I think that would need to be part of our,
our budget process with the board.
So, did I miss anything
or does anybody have anything else that they wanted
to add to that?
Okay. Thank you. Thank you for that.
Um, so,
and thank you, uh, member Holman for the finance report.
So, um, the next committee is the policy committee
and, um, uh, and I chair the policy committee.
So I will say what we dealt with this last time was we're,
um, going to be doing the second reading tonight on the
ethics policy, uh, which was, was worked through,
uh, by board Member Dowling, who did an outstanding job.
And we will have the second reading of that,
and we'll have the first reading tonight of the,
um, public comment.
So, um, those will come up later,
later on in our action items.
Um, the issue of the temperature control policy
w was referred in our, uh, December,
in our November meeting, uh,
to the Buildings and Grounds Committee.
They did, um, address that. And, um, and Mr.
Blaney came to the meeting again, um, presented the policy,
and there are some changes that the committee recommended.
And so that's going back to, uh, the, um, buildings
and Grounds Committee,
and we'll come back to us in February.
Um, I don't think there's anything else for
that other than you'll see the, uh,
public committee meeting, uh, um,
policy committee meeting minutes from November or there,
and next month will be the January.
Um, so again, you have access to the first,
the first read of the, um, public participation
and the second read of the ethics.
Um, and now we will go
to the report on Buildings and Grounds with Mr. Dowling.
Thank you. And, uh, with that introduction, I,
I don't have much more to add as you, as you said, the, uh,
temperature policy was referred
to the Buildings and Grounds Committee.
Um, we, uh, first looked at that, uh,
in December, I believe.
Uh, then Mr. Uh, Mr. Nally and Mr.
Blaney worked on that together.
They used the main school management association model
policy as kind of a starting point.
They also looked at one
or two policies that had already been implemented
by a couple of neighboring school districts.
And they, um, then, you know, basically looked at our mix
of school buildings.
You have a lot of, you have seven buildings, uh,
varying ages, varying types of, of heating and cooling.
So they wanted to, um, figure out a policy
that would be feasible for all seven of those schools.
And they did that, that was what we talked about at the, um,
most recent buildings and grounds committee meeting.
And then I drove across town to the policy committee
and we, we talked about it there.
Um, so yeah, that's, that's it.
The next, um, next meeting is on February 25th.
Thank you. Um, so we have the consent, consent agenda,
and I will have the superintendent read the consent agenda.
And, um, and without objection, we will approve that
unless there's something that somebody wants
to have removed from the consent agenda.
So I'll refer that to, uh, you, Mr. Twel.
Okay. Get ready.
'cause there's a lot, um, consideration in action
to approve the consent agenda.
Items listed below 7.1, approval of the minutes
of the regular meeting held on December 8th, 2025.
Item 7.2, approval
of the minutes from the board workshop held on
December 10th, 2025.
Item number, uh, 7.3, approval
of the minutes from the board budget workshop, um,
number one on, uh, December 17th, 2025.
Um, item 7.4, approval
of the minutes from the board workshop,
a special meeting held on December 22nd, 2025.
Item 7.5, approval of the minutes from the board.
Workshop held on January 7th, 2026.
Item 7.6, approval of donations
and grants, including the following,
2020 $5 from Trademark Federal Credit Union
to support South Portland Middle School.
$8,000 worth of food for 500 people
for weights from Wayside Kitchen, um,
PE Wayside Kitchen, uh, for two
school-wide family events happening at South Portland Middle
School, $500 from the main Environmental Education
Association for programming
that supports outdoor education at Brown Elementary School.
$1,000. Um, it's a grant won by teacher
Kendra Beach from the main Environmental Education
Association for Dyer Elementary School.
$500 from Deborah
and Mark Fuller for the South Portland High School Unified
basketball team to support the program.
And lastly, 1030 $7
and 40 cents from donors shoes
to purchase two pairs of snow pants.
2020, sorry, 20.
So expensive snow Pants, 20 pairs.
I thought it was kind of expensive.
Um, 2020 pairs of snow pants
and various sizes for students in skill in elementary.
So are there any items on the consent agenda
that anyone would like to remove?
Seeing none, um, without objection.
We will approve the, uh,
consent agenda. Okay.
Are you gonna do a motion? We can,
we don't have to, but we can.
We, we have a motion to approve the consent agenda.
Moved by, uh, member Dowling.
And seconded by Member Richardson.
Any discussion? Not, can I ask?
Yes. Can you,
what are the two school-wide family events at the middle
school that $8,000 from Wayside Kitchen
supported or is supporting? Just curious.
Do you want me to answer? Yes,
Please. Um,
Rebecca will tell us,
Hello, I'm Rebecca Stern,
the principal of the middle school.
Um, we have about, uh,
each month we have different family events,
and Wayside Kitchen is donates the food,
is donating the food to two of them.
So there are two Shark Team learning nights
that are coming up this spring in February and in May,
Just general team learning.
It's not like a, I've just never heard of,
sorry, I didn't, I just
General team learning.
Oh, what, what are the nights that we're doing? Just what,
Yeah, what are they? Just
Oh. Um, so
we have replaced spring conferences with a variety
of different activities throughout the year.
Yeah. So we have fall conferences, and then it switched.
So our Shark Team learning nights are
more academically focused.
So the February event, um, teachers do demonstration lessons
and families participate in them,
and then we talk about learning at home.
And then in May it's more of a student showcase.
So one way we are working on increasing attendance at those
is through providing free food for dinner.
So Wayside is donating those.
That is the food that is for those two events.
Thank you. Thank you. You're welcome.
Any further comments? The questions, seeing none.
All those in favor? And that's unanimous.
And we are up to new business.
So, uh, first is 8.1
consideration and action to approve policy BCA,
which is the school board member ethics.
And I have a motion to approve, moved by, um, member Dowling
and seconded by, uh, member Smith.
Any discussion? This is the second reading
of the board member ethics.
All those in favor? Okay.
That's unanimous.
And 8.2 is consideration
and action to accept as a first reading policy,
BEDH, which is public participation at board meetings.
I have a motion to accept, uh, moved
by member Richardson, and seconded by Member Holman.
Any discussion? And all those in favor?
And that's also unanimous.
Uh, 8.3 is consideration
and action to accept for a first reading the school calendar
for the 26 27 school year and 8.4.
And I'm putting these together
because I'm gonna say something, consideration
and action to accept one additional school day
for the 26 27 school year
as captured in the newly updated labor agreements.
So I'm gonna ask for a postponement of 8.3 and 8.4
because we have negotiated
that extra day in the teacher contract
and in the ed tech contract,
but we have not impacted, we have not negotiated
that in the service contract, which are the bus drivers,
custodians, uh, food service workers.
And so, um, we, we need to look at, we need to go back
and negotiate with them the impact of that.
And I am hesitant to have us, uh,
approve a calendar until we have
negotiated the impact of that change.
So, um, I would ask for a motion
to postpone 8.3
and 8.4 together, uh, moved by, um,
member Richardson and seconded.
I need a second, um, by Member Smith. Okay.
Is there any, are there any questions
or, uh, member Dowling?
I, I do just have a calendar related question. I'm sorry.
I'm gonna go to Member
Richardson, because she made the motion.
That's correct. I apologize. Member Richardson. Um,
Just how long are,
how long are we gonna give ourselves to negotiate?
Uh, so I actually think we should postpone that
to a time definite.
So we should postpone it to our February meeting. Yeah.
And then if, if we're not able to resolve it
by February, um,
So we're gonna try to resolve it in the next month.
Okay. Correct. Great. So if, if we can,
can we amend your motion Sure.
To say postpone to,
To February To February, 2026.
Okay. I'm sorry. Um, member Dowling,
Well, before I go, did the person who seconded it n need
to ask any questions or, that's
What I was gonna ask. Seconded.
Yeah. No,
but did you have question? Do you have question? Any questions? Okay.
Okay. So now I'll, I'll ask my thank you.
Um, so, uh, last year, I think this was shortly after Dr.
N Whistle, uh, came to us.
There was a staff member who came forward, um,
and proposed that we add a couple of, uh, holidays
to our, our school calendar.
And I believe Dr. Anw said he was going
to convene an ad hoc calendar committee.
And I just wanted to check and,
and find out if that committee had had done that work.
And it was, and it was incorporated into this
proposed calendar.
They did do, they did have some consideration of it.
It just was too much for us to try
to make a change right now.
So it was postponed.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you.
Any other comments or questions about this postponement?
Um, member Richardson, um,
You know, we did receive, um, an email from a teacher
about how lovely the, the two week break was,
and could we consider that?
I will say, as a parent, two weeks is tough.
Um, it's, it's, it's really tough actually, like, um,
to, to have to take
that much time off from work to find care.
I, I wanna give all the, I wanna give everything
and anything to, to, to teachers
and staff when they ask for it,
but I also want to consider what we're asking our families
during a a, an already very stressful time of year.
Um, so I, I see that we have, we don't,
we're not offering two weeks.
And I, and I, and I sup and I support that, um,
because, you know, just the dis just the dis disruption that
that can do to, to a working family, um, is, is something
that I think we need to be considering with our,
with our calendar in general.
Um, member Holman, um, it also cost to the families often.
Yeah. Disruption costs the whole thing. Yeah. Sanity.
Any other comments? I, I will only say, um,
that most typically the,
that holiday break is dependent upon mm-hmm.
When the holiday falls, right? And when the new year falls.
And so it just happened that it fell in a way that, that,
you know, made sense for it to be two weeks.
But most typically, it doesn't fall that way.
And we have to just kind of go with the calendar.
And so some, some years that may happen and,
and Member Richardson will just cringe.
Um, but, but there are other times when it's
just not going to happen.
And I think it's really driven by that.
Um, and,
and I will, uh, give my view on
considering more holidays, which was, um,
member Dowling's question,
but I, I think again, uh, the reason we have the calendar
that it exists is
because, um, the, the, that, that was the origin
of calendars and with our goal of separation of church
and state, my, my, my, if I had my druthers,
it would be moving away from, um, putting, putting vacations
around any holidays, you know, so
I'm personally not in favor
of adding more holidays to our calendar.
There will be no end to what that list will be if we go in
that direction, in my view.
But, um, any other, uh,
comments about the postponement?
Okay. Seeing none on, on the postponement of 8.3
and 8.4 until our February meeting.
Uh, all those in favor? And that's unanimous.
Okay. And, and, um, then back to, um,
member Richardson's question.
Our, our goal is going to be to, uh, set up a time
and meet with the, uh, union so
that we can resolve this issue
before we approve these a a actions these calendar.
Uh, 8.45 is consideration
and action to approve the contract with Zeal
for the superintendent search.
So that contract was, um, sent out to all board members,
was posted on the website, um,
and included two parts to it, the, uh, contract of agreement
of what the, what the, um, process
and procedure will entail, and as well as the cost.
So I need a motion to approve move by, uh,
member Smith and seconded by Member Fowler.
Uh, member Smith, do you have any questions or comments
Just to comment that I'm,
I'm excited about this organization and the leadership
and support that they're gonna give us.
I think it's, we're headed in the right direction,
and this is a really important decision,
I think. Thank you. Member
Fowler. Agreed.
Any other comments or questions, um, about this?
Yes. Uh, member Richardson,
Um, the, the contract, um, indicates that it includes,
um, the, the bias training
or non-bias training for the board.
But I thought that we, but, but,
but as I understood it, um, we were going
To do that internally. So
We are okay. But the
training that, um, will be provided and will be
provided by Zeal is a total
of about a half hour of training.
So this is in addition to, correct.
So what, um, our, um, Mr.
Paolo is going to provide
for us on February 4th is a three hour training on,
uh, given, given the diversity of our district
and the needs of what, what we have in South Portland, um,
it seemed like that doing something a little more
intensive made more sense.
So that's what, uh, Hermenes DePalo will do do
for us on February 4th.
Thank You. You're welcome.
Um, so, uh,
8.5 vote to consideration.
There's a question. Oh, I'm sorry. Yes. Maybe
I'll just vote. No,
You can ask a question if you have it. Uh, member
I originally voted against, um, this approach, um,
I think it's still consistent to vote against the contract,
even though the contract seems sufficient.
Is there any discussion among the
members that could help me with this?
I, I, I, I think how you vote is totally up to you.
I mean, I can't, I can't influence, I'm,
I'm not here to influence your vote.
Uh, if you support at this point going forward with Zeal
and Okay, and approving this contract, you would vote yes.
And okay. And if you don't, you would vote no.
So, all right. Thank you. Um, you're welcome.
Uh, all those in favor of approving the contract
and opposed.
Okay. So, uh, we have in favor,
uh, DeAngelos Richardson Smith Feller, Dowling and Holman,
and, uh, and in and in opposition.
Member Rich, uh, did the students,
Yeah.
Yes. We're a po I'm a opposed, we're a
Opposed, you're a post. Okay.
Yeah. So, all right.
Uh,
okay.
So that passes.
Um, the 8.6 is consideration
and action to approve national advertising
with the School Superintendent's Association
for the superintendent's search not to exceed $3,500.
So I need a motion for this to be on the floor.
Uh, moved by Feller and seconded by Smith.
Um, discussion Member Feller,
Um, seems like an appropriate amount to spend.
Um, I could imagine we could spend more, uh, to, you know,
track the most highly qualified candidates
who are gonna be a good fit for our district,
but I think, you know, a budget of $3,000 seems reasonable.
Thank you. Member Smith.
Um, I would just say,
as we all collectively wince at the amount of money
that we have to spend towards this, that we should recognize
as a group that the average superintendent tenure in the US
is like three to four years.
And my hope is that we can find someone who
will last much longer than that.
And as we spend money on the front end, the hope is
that it will save us from having to do this again.
So I just wanna put that out there.
Thank you. Other comments? Member Richardson?
Uh, I don't like this additional fee.
Um, I, I have, I'm having a hard time
understanding why the additional fee is there from Zeal,
but, um, I feel like we're, uh, I, I, I, I,
I support Zeal, I voted for Zeal
when we decided which firm to move forward with.
So, um, I,
I wanna go with Tyler's kind of enthusiasm
and, um, Daniel's kind of reiteration
that this is like a just, you know, a,
a reasonable kind of cost.
But, um, I, I,
I think, yeah, I just think that it, it's a, it's a tough,
uh, it's a tough additional cost to be looking at given,
um, how much more Zeal was than the, uh, competitors.
So, um, and, you know, whether
or not this is something that we could do on our own, um,
and is, you know, I'm not, we have a really busy agenda
and, um, it just feels a little overwhelming
to think about taking that on.
Um, but yeah, that's my
ambiguous feedback.
Thank you. I, I have a comment from, uh,
superintendent T Whistle.
Yeah. The, uh, uh, advertising in a A SA is like,
um, a minimal professional standard thing to do.
So Yeah, it's, and, and that's the same price for everyone.
So it, it's a, it comes with pretty much a stand,
it's a standard expense for Yeah, a search of this,
um, importance.
Other comments? Um, member Holman.
Um, I, I appreciate all the comments
that we've heard just now.
Um, I do understand, I, of course, um, what Tyler said
that we wanna try
and get a superintendent, superintendent who'd wanna stick
with us for a good long while.
I certainly support that the same time.
I feel, why is this a separate expense?
Like, why is this not part, like, I just seems like kind of
that way, like, oh, and here's one other thing that, that,
here's our, here's what we're doing for you,
but you we're, you are also gonna pay for this,
and here's what we're doing for you,
but you also pay for that.
So I just, I, I just don't like that kind of approach to,
you know, that should just be part that,
and I don't know, anyway, of course,
it would look like the contracts more,
but it is part of the contract in a way.
So, but anyway, I'm not, I'm not saying I'm against it,
but I, it's a little bit, look,
has a kind of sneaky feel to me.
Uh, uh, I, is it anybody else before I speak a member?
Uh, Dowling.
Um, I was, I was also, uh,
having some similar thoughts about that.
And, and I, I suspect, I believe that it's, you know,
if we, even if we had gone with one of the lower priced, um,
firms, uh, if they had said, well,
do you wanna do a local search or a national search?
And we said national, they would've also said to us, well,
if you're gonna do a national search, you need
to advertise an A A SA.
And it's, if I understand correctly, it's, it's not Zeal,
but it's a, a SA that's getting this $3,500.
So it's, it's, it's not that Zeal is charging us no extra.
It's, it's that, you know, you, you hire someone
to be your publicist
and they tell you to advertise in the New York Times, um,
you know, you're, you, they can't control
what the New York Times charges for that advertising.
So, um, yeah, I mean, I'd prefer not
to be spending this money or, or any money on anything ever,
but we have to.
So, um, if we're gonna do a national search,
we should just sort of, I think just,
just go all the way and do it.
Other questions, comments before I speak?
Uh, member Richardson. Sorry.
I don't just, uh, that's not, we,
we posited that question to Zeal.
It's not a pass through fee.
It, it's, it's, it's unclear how much,
um, I'm sorry, what is it? Aa,
S-S-A-A-A-A-S-A
Is charging for the, that I couldn't,
we couldn't get a direct answer on that from them.
So I, I under, I understand there is an additional cost,
but, but there, but,
but Zeal is, is is getting a, a decent amount of,
of this, of this fee.
So, but we're here and,
but I just, I just want you to, I just want you to know that
that's, that that's not entirely true.
I, I wish it was, it would be an easier cost to defend, but
Any other comments?
Member Holman, I
Just noticed on the A a SA site
that they don't tell you what their rates are.
Actually, it's one of those ones
where you have to contact them.
So, yeah.
Uh, so I will just say that I have had, uh, pretty,
I had pretty extensive conversation with, um, Jeff Melendez,
who was the executive director of Zeal about this.
And, um, what, whatever the portion is,
the far majority of this is the charge that is by, uh,
A A SA and the remaining amount is what, what,
what is the Zeal s role in, um,
in servicing that?
So whether we could do this on our own
or not would fall on somebody here doing that.
I mean, that was part of what we decided we weren't going
to do, was we were going to pay somebody to, um,
help us go
through this process in the most reasonable way possible.
So while whatever the amount is, uh, I,
I totally support what, what Member Smith said
and Member Fowler, that, um, the,
the issue here is trying
to get the highest quality candidates, uh, that we can,
and, um, with the guidance and the expertise.
So if we started to piecemeal, well,
let's do this piece ourselves
and let's do this piece ourselves, we, we might as well go
with a, with a different organization.
'cause that's not the product that Zeal was trying to sell.
They were trying to sell that they, that,
that they would be inclusive in.
Um, and, and,
and they were very clear that, that on the night
of the presentation, that this was an additional cost.
So, um, so I am, you know, again,
I, I'm like Member Dowling, I'd rather not spend any money,
but I'm totally in support of moving forward with this.
So if there are no further questions, um, member,
um, Kabi, so,
Um, I'm kind of confused on like the extra like fee.
Is that for like, like would they be posting
and be like, Hey, we're looking for superintendents.
Is that like what
It's to post it for national search.
Okay. It's to post, so it's to post it in the, um,
school superintendents association, the A A SA.
We would not get that.
We would only get local searches,
local advertising if we didn't pay this extra fee.
Oh, okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Yeah. Thank you.
Um, okay.
All those in favor of consideration
and action to approve national advertising
with the School Superintendent's Association, A A SA
for the superintendent's search not to exceed 3,500
and all those in favor.
Okay. What I, I can't see trying to follow, which is four.
Yeah. And I can't say four. Sorry. Oh, okay.
So that's unanimous. Thank you. Okay. Um, alright.
That's unanimous. And then, uh, 8.7 is consideration
and action to approve background checks on the
superintendent search finalist not to exceed
$1,595 per finalist.
Um, and I will, well, let's get a motion on the floor.
So before I say anything, uh, moved
by Member Dowling and seconded.
Seconded by Member Feller. Uh, member Dowling.
We should certainly do background checks. That's all.
I'll say.
Uh, member Feller,
I mean that Yeah. For this price
tag, it seems like a
pretty thorough background check.
They're talk, talking to all their childhood friends
and whatnot, but, um, seems, seems reasonable, seems high,
but if this is what they recommended, I think we go with it.
And Member Richardson,
I, I just don't understand why we can't do
the background check ourselves.
Like, I mean, I know it's only $1,500 or 1600,
but I mean, we've all, I mean, any volunteer
in our community has to go through a background check.
So we have the capacity to do that here.
Um, yeah.
So I will not be voting for this
A member Holman, Of course.
And there isn't a maximum
because we don't know how many
finalists will end up with, right?
Or do we? Well, I, so I was gonna speak to that.
Yeah, thanks. What, what, um,
what the executive director recommended is
that we only do a background check on our
final, on our finalists.
So some districts will do the three finalists.
Um, but his recommendation was
that we only incur the $1,595 cost,
uh, by, by doing a background check on our
selection, uh, at the end.
Um, member Richardson,
I, I think we should be running back our own background
checks on the three finalists,
because why would we wanna talk?
Why would we, why would we go down?
Why would we make an, you know, why would we,
why would we not wanna have that information leading into,
um, like at the, you know,
'cause I think there's initial an additional expense we're
considering with those candidates we're bringing,
we're potentially gonna pay for them to come here.
We're still, I guess we're still talking about that,
but, um, is there, is there a, um,
is there a, are we opposed, are we unable
to do our own background checks?
I, I'm gonna turn that over to the superintendent. Yeah.
This is, this is, uh, this is a, an official, um, uh,
background check and mm-hmm.
I don't know if you're also thinking
that the background check is the reference checks,
which you would be No.
You, the board is that would be engaged in
No, I'm thinking of whatever tool we use as a district
to run our employees and our volunteers through
This. This, this
is a, um,
This is also reference, No.
Oh, okay. It is,
but it is a, it's a full background check
that you don't do for a
School employee. Much more extensive,
um, member,
not just Dowling.
I'm sorry, did you wanna finish? What
Well, what is, yeah, what is
the, what is the difference? Yeah,
It would be like a, a financial credit.
Um, okay. Reputation.
They also, I think probably run a, um, okay.
Uh, uh, a, um, social media, uh, check and so on.
Mm-hmm.
Thank you. Uh, member Dowling.
Right? I, I was just gonna say, I, I, I know
what we do on volunteers
and teachers is typically a very basic criminal background
check through the, the state, I believe.
Um, but if I recalled correctly, uh,
what Dr. Melendez has said, this is like big time
where they, they find mm-hmm.
People's old Facebook accounts
that they thought they deleted, you know, five years ago.
It's like, it's, it's, it's looking for the stuff that,
you know, some people would prefer not be found.
And I think that's, that's why it, uh, the, the price is,
is higher.
Um, member Smith. Yeah.
And I would just add, um, of the high,
there was a high profile case somewhere in the Midwest a few
months ago of a superintendent who did,
was not given a thorough background check.
And so I would just add that in support of this,
that it would be important to cover our, all of our bases.
Other comment? Member Fowler.
Yeah. I mean, I'm in support of this,
but my only concern is that we limit ourselves.
Like three is a great number of finalists
because it's less work for everybody involved.
But like, let's not limit the number of finalists just
because there's an incremental cost
of each additional finalists.
And like, if we're really gonna get the full value outta
Zeal, we should have 'em do as much work
as possible if it means four finalists,
five finalists, are we set with three?
Uh, uh, just to be clear, the process is going
to include the board selecting X number
of semi-finalists.
Yeah. And from that X number of finalists, that's up
to the board, you know, that they're not, uh,
those are just the numbers that, um, zeal recommended is,
uh, seven to eight semi-finalists and three finalists,
and then one offer.
And so again, this, um, this says to
not to exceed 1,595 per finalist.
If the board decides that it wants to do three finalists,
uh, with a background check, we can do that.
That's, that's totally up to the board.
But this is, uh, Jeff's recommendation is
that we just do the finalist, we decide,
and if that doesn't come back clean, you know,
you go to your next person.
I mean, it's pretty straightforward, but, um, yeah.
So, um, so there's no,
there's nothing set in that, to answer your question.
Uh, member Fowler. Okay.
Seeing no further questions, uh,
or comments. I just, I just wanted,
Can I just say something? Yeah.
Um, I, I mean, I, I,
I feel like I can't not vote
for a more fulsome background check.
I, I think it's just, it would be nice to know
what it included that we're, what, what are we paying for?
So I think it's that lack of transparency
that I'm getting kind of stumped on.
Um, so I will, I will be supporting it
because I don't wanna be, I don't want to be the, the weirdo
who doesn't wanna know everything about the,
the potential superintendent.
Like obviously of course I do.
I just think there's some opacity to this figure
that I'm, I'm struggling with.
So I, I, I think, just to be clear, there,
there isn't any lack of transparency here.
There's the superintendent, uh, ant whistle responded to
that and said, it is looking at someone's financial,
someone's social media. Someone's Now
We have transparency after we had
to, after the clarification.
Well, I, I, that's Why I'm
supporting it. I, that's all I'm
Saying. Okay. Yeah,
that's fine. Um, member Rich, back to
Good. You were called on.
Yeah, you were called on.
I'm back to, uh, requirements and such.
Um, is it in the, uh, contract?
You know, it just describes the background check. No,
No. I don't think
It's described. Okay.
Point of interest, I guess. Yeah.
It's part of the contract, I think.
Yeah, it is. Mm-hmm. Uh, okay.
So, uh, consideration 8.7 consideration in action
to approve background checks on the superintendent school
finalists not to exceed $1,595 per finalist.
All those in favor? And, and, okay.
And any opposed? No. Alright. So no opposed.
So that was unanimous.
And, um, so we are at the second,
second public comment.
Um, are there other people in the audience
before I go and read this again?
Are there people who would like to speak
during the second public audience?
Great. Okay. So the public comment portion is an opportunity
for the board to listen to the opinions of the public.
Again, items on or off this evening's agenda.
The board is here to listen.
Anyone wishing to speak, proceed to the microphone
and just state your name and the city where you reside.
You have three minutes to speak.
Hi again, Sarah. Still from South Portland.
Um, so I am speaking very briefly first, uh,
about policy BEDH, public participation at board meetings.
Um, our,
Our unit has pretty strong feelings about our ability
to participate and
to provide public comment numerous times per meeting.
Um, I, I have pretty serious concerns about our ability
to engage purposefully with the kind of decision making
that takes place in these meetings.
If we do not have the opportunity to comment, ask questions,
and later in the meeting respond.
Or in my case, if I forget something in my first comment,
it's really great to have that second place
because frankly, this is the forum we get
for these types of conversations.
And I don't think that anyone should lose that opportunity.
Um, I, I'm going to quote Angela here.
This is not a cute look.
Um, I think this is something that's really,
really important to our community.
And augmenting in any way, shape,
or form the way that the public participates in these
meetings will have an effect and it will not be positive.
Um, additionally, uh, this is not the same topic.
Uh, I was not, a couple of my members reached out
to remind me to remind you that all
of our service employees also need the same, uh,
immigration enforcement training
and guidance that other student facing staff receive.
Um, I was one of those people
who was certainly very anxious driving to work this morning
and had a brief moment of thinking, gee,
I sure hope my kids bus driver
knows what to do if they're stopped.
Um, and I hope that there are clear plans for including all
of the folks who may have interactions in some way, shape
or form with outside agencies who work within our schools.
Um, I'll thank the board as well for taking such a thorough
and integrative approach for
finding our next superintendent.
Um, I think I speak for my full unit in saying
that we also do not want
to repeat this process again in just a few years.
Hmm. And we also see enormous value in background checks
and appreciate that consideration being made.
Um, I'm using this word a lot tonight,
but we are of course, very eager
to contribute in this process as well.
Um, and this last one's a little selfish.
Um, that two week break was in a lot
of ways pretty transformative for a lot of us.
Um, the number of, of educators who have approached me
to say that for the first time,
they left a break feeling refreshed.
It, it was pretty startling.
Like, I just thought it was kind of cool,
but it really was pretty game changing for a lot of folks.
But very much appreciate, um, what Elany shared as well.
And I wonder if we may want to look into,
for any extended breaks,
or possibly even for not extended breaks,
knowing the community we serve, um,
if there could be some partnership with Rec Department, boys
and Girls Club, any of our other phenomenal local partners
for finding some type of childcare support, um,
during those breaks, knowing
that we have many families that continue to work.
That's it. Thanks so much.
Thank you. Uh,
and just to clarify, I'm not sure if there was confusion
about the public comment,
but the, I don't know what that was,
but the end of the timer public comment is intended to be
more, offer more, not less.
Okay. So it was to a, allow people to speak on
or off the agenda at either one of the,
of the comment times.
So that's why you got to speak before
and you got to speak now.
You can speak both times. Perfect. Okay. Love that.
Thank you. Okay. Thank you.
I, I just wanted to be sure people understood that that was,
that that was the goal.
Um, and we are up
to school board communication. Is
It possible to ask a question
of one of the, of the speaker?
No. Okay. Uh, school board.
It's not, uh, school board communications.
So, uh, if people have comments, um,
things they want to add, uh, board member feller,
Uh, I have two things I wanted to speak on.
I mean, the first is, um, a request to the superintendent
for, um, lots of data to be brought
to the, the budgeting process.
Um, uh, yeah, we had a lot of questions, I think of
that excellent presentation a couple weeks ago.
Um, and I'm gonna round up some of those questions
and send them over, uh, just for reference.
But, um, the more data that can be presented up front,
I think there, there's gonna be less back and forth.
Uh, so that'll save a lot of work.
And then my second is, I do think that, would it be great
to open up, uh, the superintendent search
for public comment somehow,
and I'd invite my fellow board members
to think about how we might do that.
I, you know, with the current schedule, I would think
that part of the budgeting process would be a proxy for
what the community thinks is important.
And that might inform our superintendent search,
but we might want to be more explicit about
what we're actually looking for.
That's all I have to say. Thank you. Mm, that's
Fine. Uh,
other board members who have things, um,
member, um, Richardson,
Um, just just a point of clarification
and, um, chair deis, you may do that.
I just don't wanna confuse the, their community is going
to have the opportunity to participate, um, with Zeal
through a, a, a variety of community engagement forums.
Um, so I, I, I, I have, I think,
but I also think your point about the community forum
or for the, the, you know,
I am worried about community fatigue in terms
of feedback fatigue.
Um, so I would like to consider a way to
transpose or potentially maybe invite Zeal
to the community forum for the budget.
Um, I don't know if that's possible,
but something to just consider, um, given, you know,
that will be kind of one inflection point for the community
to, to speak to, um, their concerns.
That's certainly leverageable for, uh, like long-term vision
and, and selection of a, of a superintendent,
Uh, um, member Holman. Yes.
Uh, thank you. Um, that was an interesting idea.
That's, but, um, um, I wanted to say that, um,
I don't know when this is gonna be taken up,
but I, I, I said before,
and I wanna just continue to iterate
that I really want the board to take up the question
of phones in schools.
And, uh, I just want that to be a top priority.
I, I'm not sure how that should be handled.
I don't know that that should be a
one committee type of thing.
Uh, but I, I think it's urgent.
I, I, I don't want us to get towards the end
of the school year and not have
started, started that process. Thank you.
Welcome. Um, member Smith.
Um, I wanna second that point about phones and schools.
Um, and then also just, um, make a request, uh,
related to the budget.
Um, we are now two months into a spending freeze,
and one of the things that came up in finance committee was
the question of just kind of what
that lived experience is like for principals and teachers.
And so it'd be great to get an update of some kind, whether
that's from the superintendent or from principals
or, um, the union about kind of
how they're experiencing the spending freeze
and what it, what it looks like on a day-to-day basis.
'cause a big part of going forward is gonna be trying
to understand, uh, what this is doing for teaching
and learning and, and whether, uh,
we end up in the positive or in a deficit.
We don't want to do that at the expense of this school year.
So, um, that's just a request on my part.
Thank you. Um, member Davidson,
Uh, I just had a question, and I hope someone can answer.
Is the phones in school, is that referring
to a school wide ban of phones? It,
It, it, it's, it's just a request
to review the issue of schools and phones.
Okay. Yeah. That's all.
Okay. I see. Anything to do with it. Yes.
Other, other comments, questions?
Uh, so I'll say a couple things.
Um, um, um,
there, there is going to be opportunity, the week
of January 26th to the 30th is going
to be community forums from Zeal.
So they're going to be reaching out to the union presidents
to, um, uh, to
multicultural populations, to, um, the, uh,
community as a whole to the, to the, um, government
of the city, uh, to administrators, to, there's,
there's going to be a multifaceted
outreach during that time.
And there will be opportunities for, uh, some in-person
and some somebody's screaming somewhere,
uh, uh, for, uh, some in-person
and some virtual, uh, responses.
So, um, and I think, uh, board member Richardson's, um, idea
of an invite for Zeal to come to our budget forum, um,
I can certainly pursue that.
I think that's a great, I think that's a great idea.
Um, I think with, um,
member Smith's question about getting an update, um,
on the budget spending freeze,
I would ask the superintendent to include
that in our January 26th meeting, which will be the Monday
after the forum, so that we can get an update on, um,
where that, what, what that's like
for principals, uh, administrators, um, and, and,
and get giving them an opportunity
before the 26th to get input from their staff about what
that's, what that's like, uh, with regard
to the phones in schools.
And I just have a question, um, you know,
that could be dealt with a couple of different ways.
And one of the ways it could start is that there,
that it starts with the policy committee
and starts with a proposal from the policy committee
that then goes, um, goes out, you know,
differently than just coming for first read.
So that's one way to do that.
Does that make sense to you, uh, member Holman?
Um, to start, start it in the policy? Yeah.
I don't know. I don't know.
I, I, I mean, all I'm thinking is that's a way
to get a draft of a policy and get, and then figure out
and then not, rather than have it come
for first reading right away,
but then find other ways to get further community input.
You know, but we've gotta start somewhere, right? So yeah,
We do have to start somewhere.
No, I understand where you're saying about,
So I'm just thinking that maybe
It would be good to, because those are also in,
and they are actually public meetings.
They're very, yeah. So maybe, maybe we can publicize
that also a little bit more just in case
others would like to go to.
Mm-hmm. Um,
yeah, I would like to attend that for sure.
Yeah. Okay. Yeah, that makes sense. Um,
It's very big, very, very big.
Okay. Um, anyone else?
Okay. Seeing none without objection,
this meeting is adjourned.
Thank you. Thank you.